docs(running renovate): rewrite (#21222)
renovatebot/renovate: docs/usage/getting-started/running.md

- provide the infrastructure that Renovate runs on,
- provision Renovate's global config,
- make sure Renovate bot runs regularly,
- make sure Renovate bot itself is updated

If you're self-hosting Renovate on Windows, read [Self-hosting on Windows](./installing-onboarding.md#self-hosting-on-windows) to prevent line endings from confusing Renovate bot.

### Available distributions

#### npm package (CLI)

Renovate's Open Source CLI is built and distributed as the npm package `renovate`.
You can run this package in any Node.js environment - even via `npx` - and it will process all the repositories it is configured with, before exiting.

When installing Renovate via npm you are responsible for installing any third-party tools or languages like Ruby, Python, Composer, Bundler, Poetry, etc.

The `renovate` npm package is compatible with all of Renovate's supported platforms.

#### Docker images

Renovate is also distributed as Docker images on Docker Hub (`renovate/renovate`) and GitHub container registry (`ghcr.io/renovatebot/renovate`).
These Docker images work on all the hosting platforms that Renovate supports.

> You must run the Docker images in a `linux/amd64` container.

Author: Same _in_ or _on_ question applies here.

We're working on `linux/arm64` container support.

> You can't run the Docker images on a Windows or macOS container.

Author: Are you running an image _in_ or _on_ a container?

If it's _in_ here's a suggestion:

```suggestion
You can't run the Docker images in a Windows or macOS container.
```

- Someone else is hosting Renovate, and you install/configure it for the repositories you choose

If you're using the Mend Renovate App on GitHub, or if someone else is hosting Renovate for you, skip ahead to the [installing & onboarding](./installing-onboarding.md) page.

## Self-Hosting Renovate

When self-hosting Renovate you're the "administrator" of the bot, this means you:

- provide the infrastructure that Renovate runs on,
- provision Renovate's global config,
- make sure Renovate bot runs regularly,
- make sure Renovate bot itself is updated

If you're self-hosting Renovate on Windows, read [Self-hosting on Windows](./installing-onboarding.md#self-hosting-on-windows) to prevent line endings from confusing Renovate bot.

### Available distributions

#### npm package (CLI)

Renovate's Open Source CLI is built and distributed as the npm package `renovate`.
You can run this package in any Node.js environment - even via `npx` - and it will process all the repositories it is configured with, before exiting.

Renovate's npm package does not bundle any third-party tools or languages like Ruby, Python, Composer, Bundler, Poetry, etc.

> If you need Renovate to support any non-npm lock files like Bundler then you'll need to make sure all required third-party tools are pre-installed in the same environment alongside Renovate before you run it.

Author: ```suggestion
By default, Renovate does not support non-npm lock files.
You must install all required third-party tools in the same environment that Renovate's going to run in, _before_ running Renovate.
For example: to use Bundler's `Gemfile.lock` you would first install the Bundler package manager into Renovate's environment.
```

Whew, that was a tricky rewrite. Let's see what you think of this. 😄 

> in the same environment that Renovate's going to run in, _before_ running Renovate.

This part still feels a bit clunky though, open for suggestions!

Reviewer: Let's just say "lock files" and keep it generic - ignoring that npm is usually installed already

Author: ```suggestion
By default, Renovate does not support non-npm lock files.
You must install all required third-party tools in the same environment that Renovate's going to run in, _before_ running Renovate with non-npm lockfiles.
```

Do you mean like this?

In general, you can run Renovate natively on Windows as long as you have all tools it will need (e.g. `npm`, `pipenv`, etc.) preinstalled before you run Renovate.

There are two flavors:

- The `-slim` image
- The default "full" image, this is the image you'll get if you use the `latest` tag

##### The slim image

The `-slim` image only comes with the Node.js environment.
By default, the image installs the required tools when needed.
We recommend the `-slim` image for most users.

If you want, you can map the Docker socket into the container so that Renovate can dynamically invoke "sidecar" images when needed.
You'll need to set `binarySource=docker` for this to work.
Read the [`binarySource` config option docs](../self-hosted-configuration.md/#binarysource) for more information.

##### The default image

The default image comes with most package managers that Renovate supports, but not _all_ package managers.

You must set `binarySource=global`, if you don't then Renovate still installs the latest version of the tools or the requested version from the repository.
Update your Docker images regularly to keep the pre-installed tools up-to-date.

> You can use Renovate to update the Renovate Docker images:
> 
> MAINTAINERS: INSERT EXAMPLE CONFIG HERE

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Available distributions

#### npm package (CLI)

Renovate's Open Source CLI is built and distributed as the npm package `renovate`.
You can run this package in any Node.js environment - even via `npx` - and it will process all the repositories it is configured with, before exiting.

Renovate's npm package does not bundle any third-party tools or languages like Ruby, Python, Composer, Bundler, Poetry, etc.
If you need Renovate to support any non-npm lock files like Bundler then you'll need to make sure all required third-party tools are pre-installed in the same environment alongside Renovate before you run it.

The `renovate` npm package is compatible with all of Renovate's supported platforms.

Renovate requires Node.js `>=18.12.0` and Git `>=2.33.0`.

#### Docker images

Renovate is also distributed as Docker images on Docker Hub (`renovate/renovate`) and GitHub container registry (`ghcr.io/renovatebot/renovate`).
These Docker images work on all the hosting platforms that Renovate supports.

You must run the Docker images in a `linux/amd64` container.
We're working on `linux/arm64` container support.
You can't run the Docker images on a Windows or macOS container.

> In general, you can run Renovate on Windows with global mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, you can run Renovate natively on Windows as long as you have all tools it will need (e.g. `npm`, `pipenv`, etc.) preinstalled before you run Renovate.
```

There are two flavors:

- The `-slim` image
- The default "full" image, this is the image you'll get if you use the `latest` tag

##### The slim image

The `-slim` image only comes with the Node.js environment.
By default, the image installs the required tools when needed.
We recommend the `-slim` image for most users.

If you want, you can map the Docker socket into the container so that Renovate can dynamically invoke "sidecar" images when needed.
You'll need to set `binarySource=docker` for this to work.
Read the [`binarySource` config option docs](../self-hosted-configuration.md/#binarysource) for more information.

##### The default image

The default image comes with most package managers that Renovate supports, but not _all_ package managers.

You must set `binarySource=global`, if you don't then Renovate still installs the latest version of the tools or the requested version from the repository.
Update your Docker images regularly to keep the pre-installed tools up-to-date.
You can use Renovate to update the Renovate Docker images:

> MAINTAINERS: INSERT EXAMPLE CONFIG HERE

Author: Commenting to make sure we add the example config. 😉

Reviewer: Do we definitely need this? If it's in a supported format (e.g. Dockerfile, Docker Compose, GitLab pipelines, etc) then it won't need any manual config

- make sure Renovate bot runs regularly,
- make sure Renovate bot itself is updated

If you're self-hosting Renovate on Windows, read [Self-hosting on Windows](./installing-onboarding.md#self-hosting-on-windows) to prevent line endings from confusing Renovate bot.

### Available distributions

#### npm package (CLI)

Renovate's Open Source CLI is built and distributed as the npm package `renovate`.
You can run this package in any Node.js environment - even via `npx` - and it will process all the repositories it is configured with, before exiting.

Renovate's npm package does not bundle any third-party tools or languages like Ruby, Python, Composer, Bundler, Poetry, etc.
If you need Renovate to support any non-npm lock files like Bundler then you'll need to make sure all required third-party tools are pre-installed in the same environment alongside Renovate before you run it.

The `renovate` npm package is compatible with all of Renovate's supported platforms.

Renovate requires Node.js `>=18.12.0` and Git `>=2.33.0`.

#### Docker images

Renovate is also distributed as Docker images on Docker Hub (`renovate/renovate`) and GitHub container registry (`ghcr.io/renovatebot/renovate`).

> These Docker images work on all the platforms that Renovate supports.

Reviewer 2: maybe we should add a note that we only support `linux/amd64` (and `linux/arm64` soon). so no windows container or any other platform.

in general renovate supports also running on windows with global mode

Author: ```suggestion
These Docker images work on all the hosting platforms that Renovate supports.

You must run the Docker images in a `linux/amd64` container.
We're working on `linux/arm64` container support.
You can't run the Docker images on a Windows or macOS container.

In general, you can run Renovate on Windows with global mode.
```

There are two flavors:

- The "full" image (the `latest` tag defaults to the full image)
- The `-slim` image

##### The full image

> The "full" image comes with every package manager that Renovate supports.

Author: Docker Hub has a `-slim` tag for the "slim" images, but I can't find a `-full` tag for the "full" images. Is that intended?

I think we mean that the full/default image has all the stuff included. But it's a bit confusing to call it "full" when there's no `-full` tag on Docker Hub.

What do you think?

Reviewer: Yes, if there's no suffix then it means it's full. Maybe we can say the default image

> This makes the default image the best choice for most users.

Reviewer 2: i think this is now wrong. as both images are using install mode by default, so they always install each manager on the fly. they are only skipped when the same version is already installed.

so I would prefer to suggest the slim image.

Author: This means the pros/cons of the `slim` and default images change. It sounds like both images install the needed managers on the fly.

What are the tradeoffs that you make when you choose `slim` vs default image? I imagine getting the `slim` image, and then downloading 20 package managers is worse than getting the full fat default image, for example?

Can you comment what kind of benefits/drawbacks each choice has? I'll then edit the docs to put those comparisons in the docs. 😄

Reviewer: The only significant reason for the full image is for people who don't want to download/install things at runtime?

Reviewer 2: sure, bit they also need to change to global mode. otherwise renovate will still install latest version of the tools or the requested version from repo. and the preinstalled tool are sometimes outdated if the user isn't updating the docker image regularly.

we also support a persistent cache for downloaded tools, so that we only need to unpack on second+ run.

Reviewer: Maybe the full image should default to binarySource=global as a breaking change in a next major release?

Reviewer 2: 🤷‍♂️

Author: > so I would prefer to suggest the slim image.

> The only significant reason for the full image is for people who don't want to download/install things at runtime?

Should we make `-slim` the default version you get when you use the `latest` tag then?

Reviewer: I don't think we should be holding up this PR while discussing such a big change like that

Author: Here's the issue to discuss my idea: https://github.com/renovatebot/docker-renovate/issues/1237

Author: > Maybe the full image should default to binarySource=global as a breaking change in a next major release?

Here's the issue for that idea: 😄 

- https://github.com/renovatebot/docker-renovate-full/issues/1599

Reviewer 2: Ok, but i think we should still suggest to use the slim image by default

The default image has some downsides, because it:

> - Only comes with _one_ version of each language/manager - usually the latest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Comes pre-installed _one_ version of each language/manager - usually the latest
```

> - Comes pre-installed _one_ version of each language/manager - usually the latest

Author: ```suggestion
- Comes pre-installed with _one_ version of each language/manager - usually the latest
```

### Available distributions

#### npm package (CLI)

Renovate's Open Source CLI is built and distributed as the npm package `renovate`.
You can run this package in any Node.js environment - even via `npx` - and it will process all the repositories it is configured with, before exiting.

Renovate's npm package does not bundle any third-party tools or languages like Ruby, Python, Composer, Bundler, Poetry, etc.
If you need Renovate to support any non-npm lock files like Bundler then you'll need to make sure all required third-party tools are pre-installed in the same environment alongside Renovate before you run it.

The `renovate` npm package is compatible with all of Renovate's supported platforms.

Renovate requires Node.js `>=18.12.0` and Git `>=2.33.0`.

#### Docker images

Renovate is also distributed as Docker images on Docker Hub (`renovate/renovate`) and GitHub container registry (`ghcr.io/renovatebot/renovate`).
These Docker images work on all the hosting platforms that Renovate supports.

You must run the Docker images in a `linux/amd64` container.
We're working on `linux/arm64` container support.
You can't run the Docker images on a Windows or macOS container.

> In general, you can run Renovate on Windows with global mode.

Author: First we say:

> You can't run the Docker images on a Windows or macOS container.

And then:

> In general, you can run Renovate on Windows with global mode.

I think we need more explanation for the "run Renovate on Windows with global mode" part. For example:

- Explain what global mode does, or link to the relevant section of the docs
- Be clear what version of Renovate you can run on Windows
- Any other thing that I'm forgetting, or don't know about 😄

Reviewer 2: you can run renovate native on windows and macos via npm package. then you need to install required tool manually.

i don't think that there are macos containers. but windows container which run windows inside docker container.

you can run renovate docker images in docker desktop. on windows you need to use wsl. macos will use the `linux/amd64` even on modern arm mac's (changes soon with v36).

Author: Thanks for the explanation. ❤️ 

But I still don't know what we want to put in the docs based on your explanation. Can you write a suggestion for me?

> In general, you can run Renovate on Windows with global mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, you can run Renovate on Windows with global mode, if you have the required package managers pre-installed.
```

Author: I can't apply your "outdated" suggestion. This is the current text:

> In general, you can run Renovate natively on Windows as long as you have all tools it will need (e.g. `npm`, `pipenv`, etc.) preinstalled before you run Renovate.

Let me know if you want to keep the current text, or rewrite to match your suggestion! 😉

There are two flavors:

- The default "full" image, this is the image you'll get if you use the `latest` tag
- The `-slim` image

##### The default image

The default image comes with every package manager that Renovate supports.
This makes the default image the best choice for most users.

The default image has some downsides, because it:

- Comes pre-installed with _one_ version of each language/manager - usually the latest
- Weighs several gigabytes

##### The slim image

The `-slim` image only comes with the Node.js environment, so it works when:

- you don't need any additional package managers, or

> - you map the Docker socket into the container so that Renovate can dynamically invoke "sidecar" images when needed

Reviewer 2: it installs required tools on the fly by default.
it optionally can use docker to install tools inside sidecar image instead of the current image.

If you need Renovate to support any non-npm lock files like Bundler then you'll need to make sure all required third-party tools are pre-installed in the same environment alongside Renovate before you run it.

The `renovate` npm package is compatible with all of Renovate's supported platforms.

Renovate requires Node.js `>=18.12.0` and Git `>=2.33.0`.

#### Docker images

Renovate is also distributed as Docker images on Docker Hub (`renovate/renovate`) and GitHub container registry (`ghcr.io/renovatebot/renovate`).
These Docker images work on all the hosting platforms that Renovate supports.

You must run the Docker images in a `linux/amd64` container.
We're working on `linux/arm64` container support.
You can't run the Docker images on a Windows or macOS container.

In general, you can run Renovate on Windows with global mode.

There are two flavors:

- The `-slim` image
- The default "full" image, this is the image you'll get if you use the `latest` tag

##### The slim image

The `-slim` image only comes with the Node.js environment.
By default, the image installs the required tools when needed.

> If you want, you can map the Docker socket into the container so that Renovate can dynamically invoke "sidecar" images when needed.

Reviewer 2: link to binary source? because that needs to be set to docker too

Author: ```suggestion
If you want, you can map the Docker socket into the container so that Renovate can dynamically invoke "sidecar" images when needed.
You'll need to set `binarySource=docker` for this to work.
Read the [`binarySource` config option docs](https://docs.renovatebot.com/self-hosted-configuration/#binarysource) for more information.
```

Reviewer 2: i think we can use a relative link here, otherwise LGTM

##### The default image

> The default image comes with most package manager that Renovate supports.

Author: ```suggestion
The default image comes with most package managers that Renovate supports, but not _all_ package managers.
```

> The default image comes with every package manager that Renovate supports.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default image comes with most package manager that Renovate supports.
```
some of the latest are missing

This makes the default image the best choice for most users.

> You'll need to change to global mode, or Renovate still installs the latest version of the tools or the requested version from the repository.

Author: ```suggestion
You must set `binarySource=global`, if you don't then Renovate still installs the latest version of the tools or the requested version from the repository.
```

The pre-installed tool are sometimes outdated if the user doesn't update the Docker image regularly.

> We also support a persistent cache for downloaded tools, so that we only need to unpack on second+ run.

Reviewer 2: should we link to some extended description on containerbase?

Author: I can't find more docs on `containerbase` in our Renovate docs search. Do we have more docs somewhere else?

Reviewer 2: https://docs.renovatebot.com/self-hosted-configuration/#containerbasedir

You must run the Docker images in a `linux/amd64` container.
We're working on `linux/arm64` container support.
You can't run the Docker images on a Windows or macOS container.

In general, you can run Renovate on Windows with global mode.

There are two flavors:

- The `-slim` image
- The default "full" image, this is the image you'll get if you use the `latest` tag

##### The slim image

The `-slim` image only comes with the Node.js environment.
By default, the image installs the required tools when needed.
We recommend the `-slim` image for most users.

If you want, you can map the Docker socket into the container so that Renovate can dynamically invoke "sidecar" images when needed.
You'll need to set `binarySource=docker` for this to work.
Read the [`binarySource` config option docs](../self-hosted-configuration.md/#binarysource) for more information.

##### The default image

The default image comes with most package managers that Renovate supports, but not _all_ package managers.

You must set `binarySource=global`, if you don't then Renovate still installs the latest version of the tools or the requested version from the repository.

> The pre-installed tool are sometimes outdated if the user doesn't update the Docker image regularly.

Author: ```suggestion
Update your Docker images regularly to keep the pre-installed tools up-to-date.
You can use Renovate to update the Renovate Docker images:

MAINTAINERS: INSERT EXAMPLE CONFIG HERE
```

Let's rewrite that sentence, and might be good to add a config example on how to Renovate the Renovate docker images.

Yo dawg, I heard you like Renovate, so I'm Renovating your Renovate docker images with Renovate. 😜

Renovate supports a persistent cache for downloaded tools, so that it only needs to unpack the tools on later runs.

> Use the [`containerbaseDir` config option](../self-hosted-configuration.md/#containerbasedir) to control where Renovate stores its containerbase cache.

Author: Do you want me to extract these two lines into a new heading, and put it somewhere suitable?

```markdown
### Persistent cache for downloaded tools

Renovate supports a persistent cache for downloaded tools, so that it only needs to unpack the tools on later runs.
Use the [`containerbaseDir` config option](../self-hosted-configuration.md/#containerbasedir) to control where Renovate stores its containerbase cache.
```

Reviewer: I think this is maybe to much detail for a getting started. @viceice wdyt?

Reviewer 2: yes, this is something advanced. Maybe we should have a new page about renovate caching. (redis, s3, containerbase, ...)

Author: When I search for `cache` or `caching` in the Renovate docs search I get hits over multiple pages.

Sounds good to have a single page to explain the whole "How Renovate uses caching" thing. I don't know anything about caching. One of the maintainers will have to write a draft that I can review. 😄

Author: @rarkins can you create an issue for us about creating a Renovate caching explanation page, and _what_ it should explain?

I don't know enough to create an actionable issue for you... 🙈

Reviewer: https://github.com/renovatebot/renovate/issues/22284

> The default image is for user who don't want to download or install things at runtime.

Author: ```suggestion
The default image is for users who don't want to download or install things at runtime.
```

`config.js` may also export a `Promise` of such an object, or a function that will return either a plain JavaScript object or a `Promise` of such an object.
This allows one to include the results of asynchronous operations in the exported value.
An example of a `config.js` that exports an `async` function (which is a function that returns a `Promise`) can be seen in a comment for [#10011: Allow autodiscover filtering for repo topic](https://github.com/renovatebot/renovate/issues/10011#issuecomment-992568583) and more examples can be seen in [`file.spec.ts`](https://github.com/renovatebot/renovate/blob/main/lib/workers/global/config/parse/file.spec.ts).

### Authentication

Regardless of platform, you need to select a user account for `renovate` to assume the identity of, and generate a Personal Access Token.
We recommend you use `@renovate-bot` as username if you're on a self-hosted server where you can set all usernames.

> We also recommend you configure `config.gitAuthor` with the same identity as your Renovate user, for example: `"gitAuthor": "Renovate Bot <renovate@whitesourcesoftware.com>"`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We also recommend you configure `config.gitAuthor` with the same identity as your Renovate user, for example: `"gitAuthor": "Renovate Bot <renovate@some.domain.test>"`.
```

Users tend to copy that 😉

### GitHub.com token for release notes

> If you are running on any platform except github.com, you should also set the environment variable `GITHUB_COM_TOKEN` and put the Personal Access Token for github.com in it. QUESTION: this should probably be encrypted somehow???

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are running on any platform except github.com, you should also set the environment variable `GITHUB_COM_TOKEN` and put the Personal Access Token for github.com in it.
```

No, it's common - and in some cases best - practice to put secrets in environment variables

### GitHub.com token for release notes

If you are running on any platform except github.com, you should also set the environment variable `GITHUB_COM_TOKEN` and put the Personal Access Token for github.com in it.
This account can actually be _any_ account on GitHub, and needs only `read-only` access.
It's used when fetching release notes for repositories in order to increase the hourly API limit.
It's also OK to configure the same as a host rule instead, if you prefer that.

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
!!! note

>     If you're using Renovate in a project where dependencies are loaded from github.com (such as Go modules hosted on GitHub), we highly recommend that you add a `github.com` PAT.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    If you're using Renovate in a project where dependencies are loaded from github.com (such as Go modules hosted on GitHub), we highly recommend that you add a `github.com` PAT (classic).
```

Should we mention classic PAT?

### GitHub.com token for release notes

If you are running on any platform except github.com, you should also set the environment variable `GITHUB_COM_TOKEN` and put the Personal Access Token for github.com in it.

> This account can actually be _any_ account on GitHub, and needs only `read-only` access.

Author: ```suggestion
This account can be _any_ account on GitHub, and needs only `read-only` access.
```
